---
title: Achieving Financial Independence
---

{% include mathjax.html %}

Many people save some part of their income to invest it so it increases its value over time.
Naturally the question comes

> Can the return on my investment match my income?

This is an interesting question because at that point your passive income would match your active income.
In other words, at that time you can retire, stop working for a salary or as Kiyosaki says _escape the rat race_.
Then you would be free to pursue your passions!

So, how can we estimate what is required to achieve that?
Of course there are many variables that come into play here.
Also many of these change over time in unpredictable ways.
Still we ca use a simplified model in an attempt to approximate this process.

We will use these variables:
- $$s$$ is the savings rate or the fraction of your income that you invest,
so if you save 10% of your income then $$s = 0.1$$
- $$p$$ is the annual income increase factor (promotion), so if the average salary increase is 5% then $$p = 1.05$$
- $$r$$ is the annual return factor on your investment, so if the average return is 10% then $$r = 1.1$$
- $$n$$ is the number of years of saving

Temporarily we will introduce an additional symbol, but it will be gone by the end
- $$I$$ is the annual income amount

So having these, the initial investment amount will be $$Is$$.
  In $$n$$ years it will grow to $$Isr^n$$.  
The second investment will be $$Ips$$.
  In $$n-1$$ years it will grow to $$Ipsr^{n-1}$$.  
The third investment will be $$Ip^2s$$.
  In $$n-2$$ years it will grow to $$Ip^2sr^{n-2}$$.  
...  
The last (n-th) investment will be $$Ip^{n-1}s$$.
  In 1 year it will grow to $$Ip^{n-1}sr$$.

So, in $$n$$ years the total value of the investment would be 

$$
\sum_{y=1}^n Ip^{n-y}sr^y = Is{r^n - p^n \over 1 - {p \over r}} = Isr{r^n - p^n \over r - p}
$$

as it is a [closed-form geometric series](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geometric_series#Closed-form_formula)
with a common ratio of $$p \over r$$.

In case $$p = r$$ the total value of the investment would be

$$
\sum_{y=1}^n Ip^ns = nIp^ns
$$

The annual return of that investment would be

$$\begin{align}
Isr{r^n - p^n \over r - p} (r - 1) \quad  ,p \ne r \\
nIp^ns(r - 1) \quad                       ,p = r
\end{align}$$

We can compare it to the current income at that time (after $$n$$ years) $$Ip^n$$

$$\begin{align}
{Isr{r^n - p^n \over r - p} (r - 1) \over Ip^n} = s(r-1){(\frac r p)^n - 1 \over {1 - \frac p r}} \quad  ,p \ne r \\
{nIp^ns(r - 1) \over Ip^n} = ns(r - 1) \quad                                                 ,p = r
\end{align}$$

So, this number tells what part of the income will be covered by the investment return after $$n$$ years.

For your convenience here is a calculator to try out different values.

{% include saving-calc.html %}

Let's look at an example.  
Many financial advisors recommend saving about 15% of your salary for retirement.  
The average inflation rate for the last 30 years was ~3%. So, an income increase by 3% would maintain the same purchasing power.  
It is common to invest in stocks.
The average annual return of NASDAQ-100 index for the last 30 years was ~13%.  
In that case one would need ~18 years to achieve financial independence.

